--------------------------
Lab Notebook for "Deduper" 
--------------------------
Logan Wallace
10/12/22

Goal - To write a reference based PCR duplicate removal tool. 
If we have a sorted SAM file with uniquely mapped reads, remove 
all PCR duplicates (leave only a single copy of each read).

Review - What's in a SAM file?
    Sequence Alignment Map (format)
    May or may not have a header section starting with an '@'
    Basically a SAM aligner can take in a fastq file as input and 
    return a SAM file with the reads mapped to regions of the 
    genome. 
Things that we are concerned about for this exercise
    Fields - 
    1. QNAME; unique identifier for each read
    2. FLAG; Lot's of information in here but we are specifically 
    concerned with decimal 16 or the 4th bit which tells us about 
    the read alignment direction. (Whether or not it is a reverse 
    complement)
    3. RNAME; which contig within the reference genome does the read align.
    4. POS; the leftmost mapping position of the first base within the read.
    Combined with the reference name, these comprise the genomic coordinates.
    6. CIGAR; A sequence of numbers and letters that tells us about 
    continuities or discontinuities within the alignment.
    10. SEQ; the sequence of the read

STL96.txt contains 96 8-mers (UMIs) unique molecular identifiers.

What is a PCR duplicate going to look like within our SAM file?
    Same alignment position
        Same chromosome (col3), position (col4), strand (col2)
    Soft clipping - The CIGAR (col6) string can tell us if clipping has occurred (we should write a function to interpret the new read mapping position if clipping has occurred). Soft clipping is going to be represented in the CIGAR string by an "S" preceded by some number. 
    Same unique molecular index (UMI) randomer (col1)
To reiterate, what columns do we care about
    1, 2, 3, 4 and 6. 

Part 1 - Pseudocode 

Define the problem:
We have reads that are duplicates from PCR and these might interfere
with our ability assess RNAseq data and perform other quantifications.
We want to remove them from the SAM file and output a properly formatted SAM file that has been deduplicated. 

Write Examples:
    - A properly formatted input SAM file
    - A properly formated expected output SAM file

Develop your algorithm with pseudocode:

Determine high level functions:
    - Description
    - Function headers
    - Test examples
    - Return statement

*Wrote "deduper_pseudo", pushed to github repo*


# Writing Deduper

